Hello, welcome to God Day.
I'm Derek Walker, the pastor of the Oxford Bible Church, and I want to share about prophecy, end-time prophecy, messianic prophecy, and understanding the time that we live in.
And one aspect that I find very helpful is to understand
what the church age is about, the origin of the church age that we live in.
Will it go on forever?
Or will it come to an end?
And what's going to happen next?
And to understand this, we need to get the big picture of Bible prophecy.
And the Old Testament prophets, let's start with them because we
A big part of the Christian world does not take the Old Testament prophet seriously.
They kind of spiritualize their prophecies.
But what the Old Testament prophets saw, we could describe, it's just like someone who is looking at two mountains in the distance.
And, you know, if you ever have been in the Alps or somewhere like that, looking at mountains in the distance, you're looking at two mountains.
But it looks like one mountain.
It's like they're next to each other.
And it's only when you climb over the first mountain that you find that there's a big valley in between before the next mountain.
And you realize you've got a lot more climbing to do than what you imagined.
And the Old Testament prophets were looking forwards in time.
And what they essentially saw was two mountains, which we call the sufferings and the glory of the Messiah.
They saw
the Messiah, Jesus, come the first time in His first coming as the suffering Savior, as the sacrifice for our sins, as the Lamb of God who would die for our sins.
And they saw what we call the suffering Messiah.
And so there's a whole lot of prophecies that describe Jesus coming in His first coming, which of course Jesus has already fulfilled.
that he'd be born in Bethlehem.
He'd live a perfect life.
He would die as our sacrifice, like in Isaiah 53.
But also, they looked further into the future, and they also saw the Messiah in his glory.
And it's called the sufferings and the glory.
And the mountain peak further away, it was a vision of him coming to the earth.
in power and glory as the conquering king, as the king of kings and he's coming to reign on earth and he would establish his kingdom on earth called the messianic kingdom and both of these are true prophecies of the future but what they prophets couldn't see was the time in between just like you can't see that valley in between and so they didn't know if
the conquering Messiah would happen, you know, straight after the suffering Messiah, or if there would be a long time in between.
And there was a reason that God kept this time in between.
God calls it a mystery.
We know it now as the church age, the mystery of the church, or the mystery of the church age, which is described especially by the Apostle Paul as a mystery that
is hidden in God from the foundation of the world.
There's a reason why God kept that a secret.
And it's due to, well, the basic reason for that is that God had to keep it a secret because it all depended on whether Israel would accept her Messiah or not.
We're, you know, basically to cut a long story short.
When Jesus came the first time,
when he preached the kingdom of God is at hand.
He wasn't just talking to individuals, the gospel of the kingdom.
He was actually addressing the nation and he's saying, I am the Messiah and I am ready to establish my kingdom.
And of course he had to die and rise again first, but had the leadership of Israel accepted him as the Messiah, he
would be obliged by the covenants, especially the Davidic covenant to establish his kingdom then, the Messianic kingdom.
And he would reign on earth from Jerusalem and bring in the wonderful kingdom of peace that is promised by the prophets, the time of restoration of all things.
And in fact, Orthodox Jews will criticize
the, you know, Christianity, they'll say, Jesus can't be the Messiah because when Jesus came, he didn't establish a kingdom of peace.
We've had 2000 years of wars.
And in a sense, they have a point.
But what they, what they didn't, what they don't realize is that he first had to come as the suffering Messiah and that for that kingdom to be established, Israel have to receive them as the Messiah.
And because they rejected him as a nation, they rejected him instead of bringing in the kingdom, God postponed the kingdom and instead he brought in the church age.
Now, for God, it wasn't a surprise.
God knew from the foundation of the world that this would happen, but he couldn't reveal it in advance because that would remove Israel's free will.
If God already, you know,
If God said to you, you know, I want you to do this, but I'm telling you in advance, you're going to reject my will and you're not going to do it.
Then there's no room for your free will.
So God gave Israel the offer of the kingdom, but he didn't reveal and he doesn't reveal if they're going to accept or reject.
So it's when Israel rejected Jesus that he started revealing
that the church age would come in instead of the kingdom.
And so this valley in between those two mountains is already about 2,000 years.
And I believe we're very near the end of that valley now.
And God has not changed his purposes.
The church age is not the ultimate thing as far as the history of the earth is concerned, the history of mankind.
God will fulfill his purpose for the church age.
of saving many from all the nations and then he will bring in his kingdom program.
He will, there'll be the tribulation, the day of the Lord, God will move in judgment and save, have a final harvest in the tribulation.
And then Jesus will come in power and glory as the Kingly Messiah and establish his kingdom on earth.
But right now we're living in that valley between those two mountains and I think it just helps to understand that in terms of having a big picture.
We live between the two comings of the Messiah.
He's coming as the Lamb and then he's coming as the Lion.
And that's exactly what 1P the 1.10 says.
Basically the prophets saw
the suffering Messiah, the glorious Messiah, but they didn't see the valley in between.
That was a mystery hidden in God.
And one Peter 1 10 says of this salvation, and this is the new covenant salvation that the Messiah will bring in through His first covenant, the new covenant in His blood.
This is prophesied in Jeremiah 31.
It's prophesied in Ezekiel 36.
It's prophesied in many passages, the coming of the new covenant through the Messiah.
Peter again says, of this salvation, the prophets having quiet and searched carefully who prophesied of the grace that would come to you.
So the prophets predicted the blessings of the new covenant.
And then verse 11 it says, what the prophets did was that they were searching what time and what kind of time
the Spirit of Christ who was in them was indicating when he testified beforehand of the sufferings of Christ and the glories that would follow.
And this is saying that the prophets saw the sufferings of Christ in his first coming and his glories as the conquering king in the second coming, but they could not see the time period in between, the valley in between these two comings, that we now know as the church age.
It wasn't clear to them, first of all, what time?
In other words, how long this time period would be?
And also, would it be days, years, millennia, centuries?
And also it says, what kind of time?
What is the nature of that time?
What would happen in that time?
Because it's not the Messianic Kingdom, it's something else, but it was hidden to them.
It was a mystery.
God had to keep it a mystery until Israel made their decision to accept or reject the Messiah.
And that's why when you read prophecies, they often jump from the first coming to the second coming.
And they jump over the valley in between because the prophets can't see the gap in between.
So you're reading about the first coming, then suddenly it jumps to the second coming.
You know, an example of that.
is a famous prophecy, you know, Isaiah 9, 6, and 7.
So Isaiah 9, 6, for example, is primarily, really, about the first coming of Christ, for unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and his name will be called wonderful, that, in other words, miracle worker.
Counselor, which means he'll be a teacher.
Mighty God.
Yes, he's an Elgabor, the mighty God.
Everlasting father, or literally
source of everlasting life and prince of peace.
So this really describes his first coming and then suddenly the prophecy jumps 2,000 years.
It jumps over that mystery time, that valley.
At verse 7 it says, of the increase of his government and peace there will be no end.
And this is not describing the church age actually.
This is describing the future Messianic Kingdom, which is in Revelation 20, we're told it will last for 1,000 years.
He'll reign on earth for 1,000 years.
And this is the increase of his government peace and there'll be no end.
And the proof that it's a future kingdom is upon the throne of David and over his kingdom.
In other words,
This will be the fulfillment of God's promise to David in the Davidic covenant that one of his sons will sit on the throne of David and over the kingdom of David.
And that is an earthly throne and an earthly kingdom.
You see, Jesus is sitting on a throne right now, but it's the throne of his father in heaven.
But the throne of David is the throne of the earth.
The throne of that David rules over Israel and the Messiah will rule over not just Israel, but the whole earth, the whole world.
But this will only be fulfilled at the second coming of Christ.
So verse six is the first coming.
Verse seven, it jumps to the second coming.
Upon the throne of David and over his kingdom to order it and establish it with judgment and justice from that time forward, even forever.
praise God and the kingdom of God will last that thousand years and then the kingdom of God will continue under Christ into all eternity.
And so from the Old Testament prophets, there is a clear sequence of four things.
First of all, Christ's first coming to suffer and die for our salvation.
Then there will be a mystery age, a mystery time that we know as the church age now.
Then will be his second coming in power and glory
when he establishes his kingdom on earth, and then fourthly, the Messianic kingdom itself, that we now know as the millennium.
And so, this issue is one of the major issues of prophecy.
You see, the puzzle is this.
The prophets predicted the Messianic kingdom, but when the Messiah actually came,
He didn't establish the Messianic Kingdom.
Why?
And instead, he established the church age.
And the reason is because the kingdom, the Messianic Kingdom is established in fulfillment of the covenants to Israel.
And because Israel rejected her Messiah, it wasn't possible for God to establish the Messianic Kingdom at that time.
But God was not taken by surprise.
He knew what would happen all the time.
And from eternity, he actually planned
for what we now call the church age, in which God's purpose is to save as many as possible from all the nations.
Anyway, these Messianic issues came to a head in Matthew chapter 16.
And this was a very important time when God went to Caesarea, Christ led his disciples to Caesarea Philippi.
And we see in this passage that the disciples did not understand
that what was going to happen.
You know, they were just expecting Jesus the Messiah to be the conquering Messiah and they were expecting Him as it were to just take over the world and they'll rule with Him.
They didn't really understand that He would have to suffer and die first.
And so He had been hinting at that but now He makes it very clear because by this time in Matthew
In fact, it was already very clear in Matthew chapter 12 when the Jewish leaders accused Jesus of being possessed by Satan.
And he warned them then.
He said, you're in great danger of committing the unforgivable sin of rejecting me.
And he warned them.
They hadn't quite crossed the line yet, but he said, I'm going to give you one more sign, which is the sign of Jonah, which was his death and resurrection.
the time would come after his resurrection when Israel would officially reject him as the Messiah.
And so what was God going to do in that situation?
Well, in Matthew 16, it's clear that he was being rejected.
And so for the first time in verse 18, Christ revealed that he was going to bring something new that had not been revealed before.
He said, on this rock, and he's talking about himself, he is the foundation rock of the church.
On this rock, I will build my church.
So the church is a new thing.
It's not Israel, it's a new thing.
I will build my church.
And on the foundation rock of himself through his death and resurrection, he will build his church.
And then in verse 20,
It says, he commanded his disciples that they should tell no one that he was Jesus the Christ.
Now that might have puzzled you, why would he tell them not to say that?
Well, the reason is that the title Christ, which means Messiah, had baggage for the Jews.
The Jews were looking for the Messiah, but they were looking for the conquering Messiah.
But he had come to suffer and die.
So if they would have been proclaiming Jesus is the Christ,
then all the crowds would have followed Jesus because they expected him to take on the Romans.
And of course, that was not the intention.
That would have been a massive distraction.
And so he said, don't tell them right now that I'm the Christ because of that, that would be misunderstood.
But of course, after his death and resurrection, they preached that Jesus is the Christ because then it would be understood what it means.
What Christ means, it means that He would first suffer, die, rise again, and that He will come again in power and glory.
Praise God.
So it's interesting that He needed even His disciples to know this truth.
that he first had to come as the suffering Messiah.
And so in verse 21 of Matthew 16, he said, from that time, Jesus began to show to his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things from the elders, chief priests and scribes, and be killed and be raised the third day.
So notice he is now telling them that first he must fulfill the prophecies of the suffering Messiah, which they were not expecting.
And that's why Peter rebuked him in verse 22.
It says, then Peter took him aside, began to rebuke him, saying, far be it from you, Lord, this should not happen to you.
In other words, they did not understand.
Like the rest of the Jews, they ignored the prophecies of the suffering Messiah, they were just interested in the Kingly Messiah.
And so Jesus had to correct them on that.
And so he's saying, I'm going to have to suffer and die, but I will rise again.
And then he confirmed that he would still fulfill the prophecies of the Kingly Messiah, but that would take place later.
He said in verse 27, for the Son of Man will come in the glory of his father with his angels, and then he will reward everyone according to his works.
So notice, he is still affirming, the time will come when I will return in my glory as the glorious Messiah, but he didn't reveal
what the time period would be.
And then he said a bit of a prophetic paradox here in verse 28, he said, shortly I say to you, there are some standing here who shall not taste death till they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom.
So he is confirming to them, although he's going to suffer and die, he will still fulfill the kingdom prophecies.
He will establish his kingdom.
And then he says, as a proof of that, there are some standing here who will not die till they see me in my kingdom glory.
And people said, oh, that's a false prophecy because Jesus hasn't returned.
He didn't say that every eye will see him in his lifetime.
He said that some will see him.
And the solution to this puzzle, how was this fulfilled, is if you just keep reading on,
You'll see in Matthew chapter 17 how that was fulfilled.
In fact, it was fulfilled by the transfiguration because unfortunately there's a chapter break between that verse and then the next verses.
But if we just carry reading on, we'll see exactly.
Matthew 17 verse one says, now after six days, Jesus took Peter, James and John.
Those are the some, you see, that we'll see him in his kingdom glory.
He took Peter, James and John up a high mountain by themselves and he was transfigured before them.
His face shone like the sun and his clothes became as white as light and behold Moses and Elijah appeared to them talking with them.
And so what was going on here is that because he knew that they would see him in weakness, in humility, suffering and dying, that they could be discouraged.
it all failed.
But actually, he gave them a prophetic preview in the Transfiguration.
He gave a prophetic preview of him in his kingly glory and his future kingdom.
He was assuring them that although he would suffer and die, he would also rise again and he will also come again as the King of Kings and the Lord of Lords.
this vision of the transfiguration was a visible confirmation of that.
And that's how Peter interpreted it.
When you go to 2 Peter chapter 1 verse 16 to 19, it says, we did not follow cunningly devised fables when we made known to you the power and the coming, the future coming, the second coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
He says, but we were eyewitnesses.
of his majesty.
That means his kingly glory.
We were eyewitnesses of his kingly glory.
They had the preview of that kingdom.
For he received from God honor and glory when such a voice came to him from the excellent glory, saying, this is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased.
And we heard this voice which came from heaven when we were with him on the holy mountain.
And so we have the prophetic word confirmed.
In other words, the prophets declared that there was this coming messianic kingdom, the Messiah will reign on earth in his glory.
And he's saying that was confirmed by the transfiguration.
God confirmed it to us.
Praise God.
And so the transfiguration was his
assurance to them that although he would die as the suffering servant, he will indeed return to reign in power and glory.
And that should really encourage us.
But whatever mess the world is in right now, we're not here to take over the world, but we are here to save as many as possible.
But the day is coming when Jesus will return and judge this world and establish his kingdom.
of peace on the earth and he'll reign for a thousand years and we will reign with him, Hallelujah.
And so this is a picture and notice some aspects of this picture.
First of all, you will see Christ, the glorified Christ, as he will be in his kingdom on earth.
And we see that he is under his father's authority, because the father speaks from above saying, this is my beloved son, listen to him.
In other words, the father is the highest authority, but he's backing up Jesus in his authority and commanding everyone in this kingdom to obey, listen to and obey Jesus, because he is the king, the ordained king by God.
then you see people like Moses.
You see people in their natural bodies will be in that kingdom.
There will be natural people who survive the tribulation in that kingdom represented by Peter, James and John.
And then you will also see glorified saints like Moses and Elijah.
You see, they represent the glorified saints which will be like us in that kingdom.
Moses died and then so
Moses there is a picture of the resurrected saints, whereas Elijah was raptured as it were.
And so he's a picture of the raptured saints.
So the glorified saints who will rule and reign with Christ will be those who are the resurrected and also those who are raptured while they're still alive, praise God, and we will be in glory with Christ.
ruling and reign with him over the people in their natural bodies.
And of course, it also described the glory of God.
They saw Christ and a cloud of glory covered them at the transfiguration and in the same way.
The glory of God will cover the earth, hallelujah, in this future messianic kingdom.
And so the transfiguration is a prophetic preview
of what's going to happen after the church age, Christ will return, sit on His throne of glory and rule over this earth.
The big problem in a big, big part of the church world is that they've embraced the suffering Messiah, praise God, for salvation, but they reject the literal fulfillment of the kingdom prophecies.
all the prophecies that of the coming kingdom of God on earth.
They just think, well, when the church ages over, we all go to heaven, that's it.
And they forget the fact that from the beginning God has declared through all the prophets that he will establish his kingdom on earth.
And again, the timing has to do with Israel because the kingdom couldn't be established because Israel rejected her king.
But what will happen at the end of the tribulation?
The Bible says, all Israel will be saved.
Israel will receive Jesus as the Messiah.
They will call on him and say, blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.
And when they receive Christ and the new covenant and reverse their rejection of him, then he will come in power and glory and establish his kingdom.
And that's what Peter, he proclaimed that in John,
Sorry, in Acts chapter three, he speaks to is the house of Israel saying, verse 19, repent therefore, be converted that your sins be blotted out so that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord and that he may send Jesus Christ who has preached to you before whom heaven must receive until the times of restoration of all things.
Notice he's saying, Jesus will stay in heaven until you repent.
and receive the forgiveness of your sins.
And then he will send Jesus Christ to you.
And it says, which this restoration of all things, this is the messianic kingdom which God has spoken by the mouth of all its holy prophets since the world began.
All those prophecies will come to pass.
God bless you.